Raspberry Pi Boot Camp events are now being held on a regular basis in the south west of the UK. The MagPi asked Mike Bartley, organiser of the Bristol event, to tell us all about the events and how they came about, hopefully to inspire similar events elsewhere.

In December 2012 the British Computer Society in Bristol held its annual talk to encourage children into computing. The venue was At-Bristol and the theme was the Raspberry Pi with an inspirational talk from Rob Bishop of the Raspberry Pi Foundation and a number of other speakers describing their Pi projects. The event attracted over 450 attendees with at least 300 being children. It was clear we had hit a topic of high interest and we needed to understand how best to take it forward.

Both the University of Bristol and At-Bristol had outreach programs to encourage children into computing and engineering so both were motivated to work with the BCS to build on the initial successful event. At-Bristol were able to provide the facilities and logistics. The University of Bristol provided equipment and students who could both help people get started with their Pi and more advanced workshops. The BCS were also able to use their contacts to find volunteers for more advanced workshops and demonstrations. All three made financial contributions of some sort. The voluntary "let's do this" attitude pervaded the organisation and the event and enabled the three organisations to work together to pull off the first two very successful events.

The result was that over 200 children turned up with 100 adults to the first Raspberry Pi Boot Camp to learn more about what they can do with the Pi. From controlling remote control cars and LEDs to setting up a home media server – the children learned how to use the Raspberry Pi to make things!

Volunteers gave up their time to demonstrate what is possible with the Pi. The first event was sponsored by RS Components, Motorola Foundation, Sonardyne and At-Bristol who hosted the event. Marcus Bartley aged 12 commented "This was fantastic. My Pi has been at home in its box for a while but I’ve now learned loads of cool things to do with it. Me and my mates are looking forward to the next one already!" The events will now become a regular feature at At-Bristol on a Saturday in September, November, January, March and May.
The demonstrations and workshops ranged from beginner to advanced and also included a he show and tell section that gave visitors the opportunity to learn more about expert level projects. Due to the concentration of high-tech industry based in the south west we are very lucky to have access to a network of keen enthusiasts who are willing to share their knowledge and experience. Third year students Sam Walder and Jeremy Dalton held a very successful Pi interfacing workshop where children learned how to control LEDs using the GPIO pins on their Pi boards. Students Matt Oates, Adam Sardar and Ben Smithers ran a workshop where the children created a Home Media Server using remote access to their Raspberry Pi.

Pi-Cars proved to be very popular with Barnaby Kent and team helping children to build a remote control handset for a Car using their Raspberry Pi. Matthew Venn held a workshop to show how the Pi could be used to log data to the internet. The Magpi team, Tim Cox and Colin Deady, held a drop in table for advice and a multi-coloured LED workshop. Steve Battle brought along a number of robots controlled by a Raspberry Pi which sparked a lot of interest with the children. One of the future events in 2013 will be focussed on robots.

People turning up for the event come with their Pi but not always a monitor, keyboard and mouse. The Boot Camp therefore provided access to this equipment. The children were also encouraged to turn up with a laptop and there were volunteers on hand to show them how to set up their laptop to control their Pi.

From running the first Boot Camp we learnt that a number of people have a Pi that they have never used. For the less experienced users another group of students held a drop-in clinic that proved to be popular throughout the day. A number of people came with their unopened Pi and left with Minecraft installed and the confidence to continue with the Pi at home.

The first two events relied heavily on the goodwill of volunteers. To ensure the sustainability of future events we will be asking for donations and sponsorship to cover the costs incurred by volunteers. Future Boot Camps will continue the theme of workshops and demonstrations on the Pi and other platforms like Arduino. However, other aspects of computing will also be covered. For example, the second Boot Camp on June 15th featured a 'Rails Girls' workshop,  hosted by local web agency Simpleweb. Female programmers were invited to spend the day learning Ruby on Rails. In addition we ran three 90 minute workshops which aimed to introduce children to application writing using the language Processing. Steve covered the basics of variables, conditionals, loops and functions with the aim of developing a game by the end of the workshop. This will help the children prepare for a free one week programming course to be held at The University of Bristol as part of a national competition organised by the Young Rewired State. 

The Bristol Raspberry Pi Boot Camps are tapping into the natural enthusiasm of children to become digital makers of the future. Since the UK government proposed the planned updates to the IT curriculum last year there has been a growing interest in the subject from children, parents and teachers. These events aim to support the learning of the next generation of innovators and engineers, whilst providing a fun day out for the family. If you would like to contribute to future events by providing a workshop, being part of the show-and-tell section or by making a donation, please contact caroline.higgins@bristol.ac.uk

Going forward the three organsiations will continue to work together as all objectives remain completely aligned. Events will be held over five Saturdays each year and there will be themes (such as Wireless, Robotics, and smart homes) to keep the events fresh. Now that two successful Bootcamps have been held it is now possible to encourage corporate funding and Infineon have already contributed.

If you would like to hear more about future events, please sign up to the BCS newsletter at www.bristol.bcs.org.uk.

Author Dr. Mike Bartley is Chair of the British Computer Society in Bristol and of the High Tech Sector Group of the West of England Local Enterprise Partnerships.